So my name is .
Wow.
Yeah.
So often, you know, Americans, they call me Gardner.
I don't know why they present any in there.
Including your publicists, with people who are already here, too.
I see.
That's right.
It's easier to say, I think, here in America.
But it's .
OK.
So you're saying that you were here for three days, one, two, three, four?
Yes, I was here eight years ago.
Actually, it was the year when I published my first book.
But you should have a drink.
Well, what are you drinking?
I'm having Scotch.
Yes, Scotch with soda water, is that what it is?
Mm-hmm, sure.
Okay.
Do you have a preference?
Pardon?
Well, just anything.
Scotch.
Not bourbon, but Scotch.
Okay.
Anyway, the publishing house, they are paying for our meetings.
They were very eager, like I said, to remember today.
The book is generating a tremendous amount of interest.
Well, it has, so far, yes.
I'm really astonished.
myself about that fact really you know really because when I wrote the book I thought that this book I mean it was important for some very few people I thought that it would never become a really I told my wife that I had you know written several books before like four books eh well this is
No, well, my first fiction book, I also have written textbooks for school, but my first fiction book is a collection of four stories.
Then came two books for children, and then my real breakthrough in Scandinavia as a author.
It was a book for young adults, called Young Adults.
Young Adults, yes.
And it was called, I think the English title would be either The Patient's Mystery, or you might say The Mystery of Cards.
That game is the mystery of Cards.
Cards, you know, playing cards, you know.
I'm just helping myself when I come to stand with friends.
That's right, that's right.
You know, it's a book which is, in a way, built exactly as Edith O'Cards, with 53 chapters.
And the most important character in the book is the Joker.
which is, in this book, sort of a metaphor, symbol, for the outsider, the philosopher, asking questions, you know?
So there is a similarity then?
Yes, because the other book is also, you might say, a philosophical novel.
Socratic kind of a novel, perhaps.
In a way, but not a philosophy book, you know?
But it asks questions.
That's right.
And then, you know, it gave me several prizes, you know?
And in a way, I became a famous man in Norway.
Then I told my wife that now I think it's important to write a book on philosophy for young people, to be understood by young people, you know?
So, that's it.
We will not make money on this book.
It's just so important.
Because you see the other books.
It is on the surface.
It's a book about a father and a son.
They are traveling through Europe, from Norway, to Athens, you know, the capital of philosophy, in a way.
And I imagine that when this boy comes home to Norway, he will, of course, go into a library and ask the librarian for a book on philosophy.
However, the librarian would have to say, I'm sorry, you're too young.
you know, but we have some books about dinosaurs, you know, or about astronomy, you know, but not philosophy.
And that was a shame, I thought.
And then I decided to try to write such a book.
At first, I tried to write a few books, you know, and the first sentence I wrote was very silly, I remember I wrote, the human beings, they have always asked themselves existential questions.
Oh, no, it's so boring.
I was so much like a teacher, you know?
You want to engage with a child, obviously.
Well, yes, I wanted to try to write a philosophy book, not only for young people, but also for, you may say, for adult people above 13, 14 years old.
That was my purpose.
That was my plan.
And I gave up, because the book was a boy.
And then the plot,
of a novel.
I wrote about Sophie coming home from school, finding these notes, these letters.
Who are you?
Where does the world come from?
And they think that these questions are accurate.
And you can't.
And then the story
of a novel and also a philosophy that he started.
And a novel within a novel almost.
In a way, yes.
So that was the beginning.
I think you enjoyed playing games, though, too.
That's art.
I think I enjoyed intellectual puzzles, you know?
So the other book, the first, you know, the other book called The Mystery of Cards is very, it has a very intricate, you say that?
Intricate?
Intricate structure.
Very, you know, and so far.
But my only purpose for Sophia's role was that I didn't have any artistic ambitions in this role, only pedagogical.
At what point did you realize that you were writing
something that would engage the intention of millions of people that would transcend the original scope in your mind.
It took a long, long while.
You know, I mean, did you finish it and then went out into the world and then you discovered that they... You didn't know it when you were finished.
I wrote that later to my publishing house in Norway and I asked them,
for publishing this book, even though, of course, it would not be a success economically.
You know?
So I was wrong.
And even my publishing house did not at all expect this to happen.
But it came out in Norway only three weeks before Christmas, you know, in 91.
Oh, so this is about 91?
In Norway, yes.
In Norway.
So this book is three years old?
Yes, it is.
I have written two other novels after this book, and only for this, you know, in Norway we are mostly selling books before Christmas.
And in these three weeks the book came in a lot of editions, you know.
Even then I thought this is a book in Norway for Norwegian, you know.
It's now 29 countries.
It's incredible.
In Germany, I understand 350,000.
No, no, no, it's much more.
I talked to them two weeks ago, and then they said now it's more than half a million.
They have sold in hardcover.
In hardcover.
And, you know, I couldn't understand it.
I'm still astonished, you know.
In your theory, I mean.
Yes.
I didn't when I wrote the book, but now I have.
You know the magazine in John Nicole Der Spiegel?
They have a bestseller list.
You must be way up here.
Number one.
It has been number one for half a year.
You know, it's a book for young adults.
You know, you never find books for young adults on a list like that.
And in her book, well, theory.
I have one very tricky
theory and that is fine you know that very many people they have some feeling that philosophy is something interesting and important but too difficult without even understanding perhaps what philosophy is when you ask the question where do we come from what's beyond the stars when my daughter says to me are there other sons like you know this is all
They're asking existential philosophical questions.
They really do.
And I remember when I was a kid, you know, I was asking very much the same questions as the philosophers asked.
Like, I remember, for instance, you know, I was running to the bus.
Running.
And then my feet were, you know, running.
My mind was thinking of something completely different, you know.
other things.
Then I asked myself, how could my students understand how to run?
How to move?
And in a way, I then asked the same question as Descartes.
You know, the French philosopher.
Descartes.
Descartes, yes.
And I remember that I asked my mother and father, we have a cottage cabin in the mountains, where the animals are, the cows, you know,
Then I ask my mother, mom, mom, mom, why does the car always get a car?
You know, another sort of animal.
Well, I ask the same question as Plato then, you know, like that.
So, so, so my, I think Plato.
Plato, Plato, I'm sorry.
I'm just saying this for my, I'm sorry for my pronunciation.
You don't mind my, you don't mind my.
Look at all.
No.
Because you can have a lot of interviews in this country.
That's right.
It's very hard for me to learn.
You said quite a little.
Very good, yes.
You know, but that was a very easy theory, because I think that in Scandinavia people, a lot of people, they understand, to a certain extent, the meaning of the word philosophy.
But it's too difficult.
Only for professors.
See, I'm Greek.
I'm American.
Really?
But my background is Greek.
I see.
And then you understand, of course, the word, you know.
So philosophy is... All Greeks are philosophers, I think.
Yes, I think.
That is true that I am in Greece.
You know, I even knew people, they have names like Aristotle.
I have a cousin named Aristotle.
Yeah.
And we have another cousin named Saka.
We call him Saka.
That's right.
There's another one called Plato.
And these are revered names.
That's right.
What better name for a child than Saka?
I feel that the Greek people, I am actually quite often in Greece, because I have in the summertime a course for Norwegian teachers,
at the island Lesbos.
Lesbos?
Lesbos, yes.
Wonderful.
Yes.
In a town called Kaloni.
We live in a monastery, and there are the people from where we are, and I teach them philosophy.
Me and some colleagues, you know.
So that was the easy theory, but then there is another theory, and that is that, you know, when I grew up, I mean, I mean that all people
All societies, I mean, I'm sorry, need a marketplace, a place where we can meet and where we can discuss thoughts.
And when I grew up in Oslo, Norway, we had in the 50s a central marketplace where people really met and talked.
the greeks are exactly and you know what i'm talking about is the greeks word agora that's right that's precisely where they did this stuff yes they would go inside they did you know under appropriately you have the old agora
Today it's more the placa.
That's exactly where the placa is.
I've walked through it.
I always feel the stimulating lanes, you know.
And I think that all healthy society needs such a meeting place.
But then came the modern society, you know.
I moved to a suburb.
We had lost this common marketplace.
However, now we've got the television, but only terrible.
Well, but it was only one channel, you know, for a long, long, long time in Norway.
And then the television was a meeting place, a common marketplace.
Now we have got all these different cable televisions, you know, all the channels.
So we can choose, in a way, that
and lost the common marketplace.
Well, I think that maybe people now, they feel that it's important to have a common marketplace in the history.
I understand that one of the motivating factors for you to persuade you to write this book was this plethora of new age
philosophy, which outrages me, I have to say.
And you might talk a little bit about that.
I mean, what do you see out there separating this nonsense of pop philosophy?
Well, I have a skeptical mind.
Well, I think that, you know, for 20 years now, in Norway, and I think in America too, when you went into a great bookstore,
There were huge helps under the title alternative philosophy, or new age, you know.
Then I thought, so, that's life.
So great affection for alternative philosophy.
So where is the real philosophy?
It must be an even greater department, you know.
So they didn't find it.
If there is a one, there has to be a two.
You don't have a two unless there's a one.
Exactly.
Or a B or an A. I mean, that's right.
But all they have is a two without having a one.
That's right.
No, I agree.
I mean, back before, we used all this alternative stuff.
It would be important to know the real philosophical and critical traditions from back to the light of soul process.
Did you sense from your students that there was a backing off in philosophy, that there was a need for books such as the one that you intended to write?
Yes, because really, and I think there's something new in Europe, because, you know, it's really new, because in the 70s, when I started to study it, in a way, we were hiding behind the ideologies, you know?
Very many students in Norway, they said they were Marxists.
If not, you were not a Marxist, you know?
Are you still Marxist, by the way?
No.
But we were fighting.
We have basketball.
We insist on continuing to be a Marxist.
But anyway, I'm sorry.
No, no, I... I'm curious if it's still involved.
No, no, no, not at all.
It's really... I mean, we have finished with Marxism.
And in a way, we have finished with ideologists in general.
So today, we are not hiding behind the answers.
We are asking the questions.
you know and i remember i myself was really uh active in the student politics you know also a little left wing you know and yeah i was and but i remember i took part in the vietnam demonstrations you know you were just a kid yes i'm very young
I was part of, I was in the service during that year.
I see.
You were in Vietnam?
Yeah, I was a naval officer.
Really, really?
Oh, that's interesting.
I'm a little older than you are.
Yes, you know.
But the 60s was my decade.
Exactly, from me to the 70s.
You know, so, but then I think I had some sort of a secret voice.
I did something a little dirty, you know.
I couldn't tell my friends.
They would be very angry with me.
But I sometimes left the Vietnam demonstrations, you know, after it was finished, you know.
And I did this dirty thing.
I went in the opera.
You know, that was forbidden.
It was too, what do you say, bourgeoisie?
But I went there and we listened to Bertini and Verdi, you know.
What is opera?
In a way, it's a synthesis of love and tuberculosis.
But in a way, the opera told me about life.
You know, because what is life?
We meet each other, but maybe we get in love.
We walked together for a while, and then we got taken away from each other again.
That's what the Oprah is about, and this dimension.
I didn't find that in the student revolution.
I would like to know at what point this became a novel.
It became a work of art, which is nice.
It became a creative work.
It didn't just become a textbook to explain difficult philosophic concepts for the kids.
It became...
a work of art that embodied all of these kinds of things, and it used it to advance a plot.
And I did it for the meaning of a way.
When did that start to happen?
I wrote and then the process, the creative process.
You know, I decided to write the book on the paper, and I wrote 60 Patriots, and I threw it away.
It was too much like being a professor behind the chair.
I gave it up and it was put in the cell away for some months.
And then I just had this picture, mental picture.
Oh, Sophie.
Coming home from school.
Yes, in a way.
You have a mental picture of her.
Yes, I did.
Coming home from school.
Tell me about the rabbit.
Is this an American jacket or is it the same jacket?
No, it's not only American, but I think real American.
I've seen about ten different jackets of the book, you know, so far.
And that is the American.
Do they amuse you?
Yes, it's very amusing to see the different jackets.
Because it is the reading of the book.
Yes.
It is some artist's...
I think in the beginning of the book there is this allegory of the rabbit and the human being born at the you know
I thought there might be an Alice in Wonderland kind of movie.
Well, perhaps, too, but I'm using this rabbit like the magician, part of the top hat, you know?
And in a way, we are, the world is this rabbit taken up from the top hat of the universe, you know, from nothing.
The world is created in a way, you know?
So that's, I think, why they're here and only here in America.
Because, for instance, in Norway and in Denmark, they have made other jackets with columns and acropolis, and with Albertullus, this man in the book, and Sophie, and the dog, and, you know,
When you say when you have a mental image or so, when you think of Marx, you think of yourself, and you... Well, you know, I often meet young people in Norway, and they often use the arguments for nothing.
You know, did you want to... Yes, you know, I have...
I was asking about an image of Sophie.
There are a couple parts to this question.
This individual, this malleable young teenager, had to be a girl.
Couldn't be a boy.
For two reasons.
First of all, the concept, Sophia,
you know the greek word wisdom the concept of wisdom sophia is in the european tradition is female you know it's an old tradition and also in greek mythology
She is the goddess of wisdom, you know, with this old, old, you know.
She is born fully grown.
That's right.
But I mean, the concept of Sophia.
And the concept of Sophia is also in the Orthodox Church, you know, the Greek Orthodox Church.
I know.
So it's an old tradition that God is male, but God also has a female part, person.
which is the Holy Sophia.
You know, in Constantinople, in Istanbul, there is this old church called Hagia Hagia Sophia, which means the Holy Sophia, you know.
So it has to be, I think, a girl.
Even Socrates, when he is being asked, who gave you your wisdom, he is saying it was Biotima, a woman.
So, and also in general, not always, but very, very much in general, I think that
women and girls are in a way a little more curious to understand things than men for women it's very often important to try to understand some things while it's for men often more important to be understood the other way not always but you can recognize it in the restaurant you see that a man and a wife they are sitting talking together
She's really listening to him, trying to understand, you know, often, not always.
And he is trying to be understood.
And philosophy is really about trying to understand something, to be curious, you know, to, you know, so process.
He said that I know only thing, only one thing that I don't know.
And then he became a philosopher because he wanted to know more.
When did you realize that you were a philosopher?
You know, the real source of this book, for instance, is my general experience of life.
I mean, when I wake up in the morning, I think it's changed that I live.
But I, you know, who am I?
What is the world?
And also I know that I am here just for a short while.
Very short.
And then I will go.
And I will never, ever come together.
That is my general feeling.
You know, very often in Norway, people are, young people, very interested in the strange stories about info.
You know, info.
Why?
I, I,
I mean, in a way, they are crossing the water to get water.
Because there is not any miracle greater than the world.
So, I saw a movie called Close Encounter of the Third Kind.
Yes, did you write that?
Yes, I did.
But, you know, I think behind this title is lying this way of thinking.
Close Encounter of the First Kind is when you see the UFO.
Oh, the second kind is when you even see these creatures, these, you know, human-like bodies in the UFO.
Then you have a close encounter of the third kind, when you can even touch them, these aliens, the strangers, you know?
Okay?
But I have experienced a close encounter of the fourth kind, because I am his success-based man.
I mean, I will say that I have experienced a close encounter of the first time, because I am this peculiar spaceman.
I am this alien, this stranger.
And I go to the mirror in the morning, I watch my face, and I think, who are you?
Is there any hope for a guy like you?
So you do this every morning if you could ever... My wife is asking me exactly that question.
You are lying to me.
You don't every morning.
And of course she is right.
Often.
Very often.
And maybe I thought for a while that I was a little like an outsider.
But I think that very many people, they feel it this way.
Who am I?
Where do I come from?
What is the universe?
So those are the two questions that have to begin this book, aren't they then?
And then?
Yes, sir.
They're the most fundamental.
In a way, I think for me, all philosophical questions, very late, can you say that?
Say again?
Very late.
No, they are coming out of me.
Derived from?
This is the same question.
What is the world?
What is the universe?
Where does the universe come from?
That is, for me, the most fundamental philosophical question.
I'm sorry for talking so far.
No, I love you.
It will be because I'm a pirate.
I've been traveling all the day.
I will slow you down when I do it.
Very good.
I have to transcribe it.
Everything you're saying is important to me.
And you don't mind if I jump around with the questions either.
We'll go all over the place.
Yes.
You'll jump together.
And I do it very well.
How has this book changed your life?
And I don't just mean clearly the financial success that undoubtedly has come with.
It's kind of irrelevant, I guess.
Well, for me it is.
The only thing of luxury I will buy is, what do you call it in English?
I know they are making it now in Germany.
It's a very old instrument where they play, you know, melodies.
What do you call it?
In a seat.
Oh, an organ or some kind?
Yes, it is organ.
A hand organ.
Where you have the melodies on some sort of thing, you know, like that.
That's the only thing, it's very funny.
It cost about $10,000.
$10,000.
$10,000?
Anyway, this was just for fun.
No, it has changed my life, really, because I am, in a way, not a free person anymore.
Because I am being, you know, now I used to be a teacher.
Now I'm not.
But when I was a teacher, I had more time to write than I do now.
It'll settle down a while.
I hope so.
I'm hopeful that that book that you mentioned earlier, the one about the card, is published here.
I really hope so, too.
I think it probably depends upon the success of this book.
Maybe, but in a way... Do you have any apprehension?
I'm sorry, finish with it.
Pardon, what do you mean apprehension?
About how this book might be received?
Yes, well, I... Why don't you finish with it earlier, in a way, you were saying.
Yes, about the other book.
I think...
In a way, for me, personally, you know, it's perhaps even more important than this one.
I think it's... I really, myself, I really consider it, but I know this biblical, the material part.
You probably don't realize it, because you are a philosopher, you are a scholar.
We have preoccupied with these questions of resistance and what.
I mean, the central question is what and why.
But you're a storyteller.
Yes, that's what I am.
You're a storyteller.
In a way, and that is what I'm doing all about.
Did you know that you had the power to encamp and to engage the readers?
Yes, in a way, I saw an article in the Norwegian newspaper saying that I think 60% of all kids could use the computer, but only 8% could boil an egg.
I'll read a book, for that matter.
Or boil an egg.
But for children, my kids, who are two daughters, they are really important to do this.
They teach me things.
Yeah, that's right.
Exactly.
But do you think that people are reading so much?
My kids do read books, because they're brought up in a culture of belief.
My house is a house of books.
The book I wrote is a tribute to books.
My book is coming out next year, by the way.
Really?
It's called Bibriomania, Book Madness.
Oh, that's a good thing.
Yes, really.
I'll send you a copy in Norway if you'd like.
Can you give me an address before we leave tonight?
Do that people then I you know of course the people who really listen to me now in Norway in this little country, you know And I can take it to my publisher or whatever.
Yeah Yeah, I'd like you to read it again.
Yeah, that's gonna be a big book six hundred and fifteen pages.
Oh really interesting and it starts in Alexandria where they tried to gather all the world's knowledge under one roof and that it was a fire They actually tried to send out and get all the books.
Yeah
and bring them together here.
That's right.
And you know what?
They came very close to doing it.
Look at the people who worked at Ellison.
That's right.
It was unbelievable.
Anyway, I don't want to talk about my book.
And that is from where we got the word museum.
Muses.
It was a museum.
The word museum comes from muses.
I know.
They gave...
tribute that honored the muses, which inspired their native instincts.
That's right.
That's where the word museum comes from.
Have you ever been to Delphi?
Delphi.
Yes, I have.
I've been to Pergamum.
There was a wonderful library there, which is a rival library in Alexandria.
I'm very interested about this book.
What did you say?
Bibliomania?
It means the mania for books.
But in the process, the people who are passionate about books,
They preserve ideas.
They save things.
They just figure it's books.
There is a misconception that once it's in a book, it's saved.
It's not.
Books are destroyed.
Books are burned.
Books are thrown away.
You know Beowulf.
Yes, yes, yes.
Well, that would not exist today if it weren't for a book collector.
Robert Cotton saved the only known copy.
When they destroyed the English monasteries, he got a copy.
And if you go to the British Museum today, there's the original copy right there.
I see.
Anyway.
You know, the old Norse mythology was saved in a similar way.
It's a book from the, in the 13th century.
In a way, it's a description of the old Norse mythology.
And there is one codex, you know, one manuscript that was found.
Codex, yes.
That was found.
That codex in Copenhagen.
Really?
Very interesting.
Very, very interesting, yes.
Let's get back to the book and then let's chat because I have to get enough of my story.
You were talking about your... When you discovered that you were a storyteller,
Did you realize this?
No.
Well, I realized that I was a real, that I was a storyteller in the previous book, the book before that, The Mystery of Cards.
Here, in this book, it was the necessity of telling a story.
Because I failed telling about philosophy without using the, what do you say in English, genre?
Styles.
What do they say?
G-E-N-R-S.
Genre.
So I failed using the textbook genre.
I had to invent the story.
I think that the human brain is made for stories more than for digital knowledge.
You know, like, you know, talking about the Greek tradition, you know, Homeros?
Homer.
Homer, you know?
You know, of course, it's a story.
How could people remember this?
Because it's a story.
It was oral tradition.
It was passed on oral tradition.
Yes, oral tradition.
For many hundreds of years.
That's right.
And very well was passed on very well.
Because the Odyssey is much better than the Iliad.
That's right.
And it was passed on well, obviously.
You can't see the hand of one writer.
No, no.
You think so, you can or you can't?
No, I mean, that's Homer.
Maybe it's not only one man.
Maybe a tradition, the Homeric tradition.
Yeah, but there is belief that Homer had to be somebody who, it is a story.
I don't know, the same about Shakespeare.
There's only one instance that I can think of where a committee has actually created a work of art.
That's the King James Bible.
You've got all these poets together, and they did this wonderful version of the Bible, and that was a committee.
But otherwise, I think one person has to do a work of art.
Maybe you disagree with that, I don't know.
No, no, no.
I think that that is a very good argument for that Homer must be one person.
But there are also... No, no, I don't know.
I'm not an expert at all of this.
So I think that it's just like some people, they are saying that Shakespeare was written by a lot of people.
You see one mind behind it.
Shakespeare is one of my abiding passions in life.
Yeah.
And...
No, this is one... He was the original existentialist, I think.
That's right.
When you say to be or not to be, that's our third grade English.
All one-syllable words.
To be or not to be.
And then you can take... That is right.
You go nine words before you take a question.
That's two syllables.
To be or not to be.
And that is exactly, actually, for instance, kind in, let's say, you know, Sartre, sound called Sartre.
I get several letters from young people.
And from girls, mostly girls.
In general, girls are reading more than boys after they are ten years old.
And very often they say that, I have read your book.
or i talk to them and i say really did you read all of it well when i came to hegel you know hegel it was a little difficult i just have some faces but i had to read it through to see how it was with sophie and hilde you know so that was the epic genre that kept them really
So half a million Germans would not buy a book on philosophy.
But a novel about the book of philosophy, that is it.
I believe in the story very much.
I think I'm not afraid that the books will die.
No, I don't think so.
As long as people have stories to tell, books will come out.
So it could be... I left the project as a textbook.
I just call it a project.
Yes, in a way, it was a project because what I wanted to do was, you know, to give this world perspective on history to other people.
Because it's so important for me.
I mean, to... You know, I am not only living my own life.
I have...
I identify myself with something that is bigger than me.
I'm not only my first name, I am a European.
I take part, I am a part of, and I'm a participant in something that is greater than me.
If I did identify myself only with my physical ego, I would be a hopeless person.
But I do identify myself with the human tradition.
And this is so important for me.
We live in a so-called post-modern mass society where we are walking in piles of mosaics.
We are living in the great cities
we don't see the connections in life.
You know, the postmodernism, they have tried to deconstruct the novel, the film, the metaphysics, the theology.
And I think that in a way, under the surface, people are in a lack of the reconstruction.
What I wanted to do was to reconstruct this mosaic.
We all need some sort of a picture of life, a world picture.
You know what it said, some of the things that I've read about the book is that you really have succeeded in the job of explaining the various concepts.
You can't clearly, it can't be a detail, it's not a college course in philosophy, but you do provide an introduction to people on these
I hope that some people then will want to read more.
I mean, do you have in English the expression tabloids?
You may say that in a way this book is a philosophical tabloid.
Wow.
Okay.
But what I want to do is to awaken curiosity.
People's curiosity.
And make it accessible, I guess.
Accessible.
And also, that's a good word you can remember.
That's right.
Accessible.
To make it accessible.
Something that many...
my motto when i wrote the book my my my own private motto was philosophy for all you know that's that's exactly exactly so what i now of course i'm very curious about is what is america
They are relating to this book.
And let's say for the record here on this case that, as you're saying this, you've only been here for about three hours, right?
Exactly.
And so how long are you going to be here?
For one week.
For one week, and where are you going?
I will mainly be here in New York, and then I will go to Wattingham.
And so then the book will come out, and then you'll see how... It comes out tomorrow.
You'll see what the response is.
Yes, I will.
And, of course, it's a huge country.
It's 250 million people.
And I imagine you hope that this... Well, what I really hope is that... I really hope that I'm not so concerned about numbers.
But I hope that this can mean something for some people.
It's not a reboot for all people, but perhaps it is a reboot for some people.
How do you explain the phenomenal reception in Germany?
That is unbelievable.
That is absolutely extraordinary.
Unbelievable, really.
And I didn't expect it, but I think that, first of all,
The first thing I mentioned was that philosophy is interesting and important, but too difficult.
Now it's accessible.
For me.
Second, we have lost the common Agora, and we need something, all the things in common.
We cannot watch all the TV channels, but we can all know who's good to him, who Shakespeare was, who Aristoteles and Plato was, you know?
We need a common language.
We need to refer to something in common.
That's my second theory.
My third theory is also that we have had this new age philosophy, this instant philosophy for some years, and I think in a way people are now getting a little tired of it.
And they want the real stuff, if you understand what I mean.
In a way, talking about this, I call it instant philosophy.
Like, we live in an instant society.
You can have instant food, and pornography is giving you an instant access to erotic.
This new age, but we, nobody really needs
What we really want is love, and love takes time.
Knowledge too takes time.
Knowledge takes time.
And there are no shortcuts, neither to re-love nor to philosophical insight.
So I think that in a way I would call a lot of this alternative philosophy, I would call it philosophical pornography.
Now, even though you're not teaching the school anymore.
Not anymore.
But you still consider yourself a teacher, I'm sure.
Yes, in a way, as a man in the world.
But I also very much enjoy listening.
And not only talking myself, of course.
You seem more engaged by the question than you do by whatever the answer might be.
It is really intelligent what you remarked now.
Because very often journalists meet, they ask me, who is your favorite philosopher?
But you didn't ask that question.
Because you understand what is really true.
I am more interested in the questions themselves than in the
Give them answers through history.
I mean, there is no answer.
In a way, no.
But then, you know, the questions can be important.
Because let's say I ask the question, where does the world come from?
Even though I cannot grasp an answer, there is an answer.
You know, it's just like it's a murder that's committed here between Clark and Lexington Avenue.
The police will ask that question, who committed this murder?
Somebody did, even if we don't know who did it.
There is an answer.
And that is thrilling.
Can you say that name is thrilling?
Thrilling.
Thrilling, what do you say for me?
Thrilling, yes.
Thrilling.
Very thrilling.
There is a concern.
And also if I ask a question, is there some sort of a God behind the universe?
Well, either the list or not.
I was going to get to that, but you suggested that earlier.
It's the first time if a man gets this, that I'm more interested in the questions.
I walk on the beach in the ocean with my daughter, and she says to me, Danny, do you think it's possible to know how many grains of sand there are?
And I say, it's impossible to know, but there is a number.
The number is, there is a number.
And also, no one knows, none of us know, but there's a number.
And even though God might know, maybe not.
And even though the answer then is behind my neck, and I'm sitting in this cave, you know, but there's a number.
I want to...
Turn around and see them.
How many stars are there in the sky?
That's right.
No one will ever know.
No human will ever know.
And we have heard about it.
But there is a number, I'm sure.
And we have heard about the Big Bang.
What happened before?
What gave the Big Bang?
And also, let's take another philosophical question then.
What is important for me?
When we look at the history, all the stars,
and the history of this planet and the history of life.
Is there any purpose, any teleology behind the universe?
Or is everything by accident?
You know, the history about life here on this planet is, in a way, the history of how life and lures
are becoming more and more and more complicated.
Complex.
Is this something just by accident?
Or is there some sort of a purpose?
That question is important.
Is there even a purpose or a design?
A design?
A design.
That's right.
A purpose is almost takes on a moral sense.
Okay.
A design is almost structured.
It's not an expression as teleology.
Exactly.
So I agree.
That is very good that you tell me.
You would say design.
I would say.
Somebody else might say purpose.
That's right.
To me, purpose is intent.
And I'm not saying it's an intent.
Intention.
Is there any intention behind it?
Whoever designed the human body...
Was there a purpose there, or they were designed to make a perfect machine?
They're wonderful, but they're nothing compared to the systems built here.
They work beautifully.
They definitely break down, and then they have replacement files.
There's nothing in the intention behind the universe.
From our intention, you see, is a very interesting word.
I personally believe at some point, long after we're all gone, I believe it's a very rational answer to that.
It's totally beyond our consciousness.
Whatever hand is there, it has some cosmic meaning.
It's way beyond that.
It's comprehensible at some level.
Not at this level.
And also I think that it may be a more... No, but we never know, you know.
But I think that to teach young people to ask questions is important.
When I was a teacher, you know, I always, not always, very often, when I had my course on philosophy,
five hours, lessons per week.
I said the first hour, first lesson.
Now, ask all the questions you would like to have the answer on.
And then they asked, where does the university like me to speak?
And then they asked questions about family life.
And then after five minutes, they were fired.
No more questions.
I said, we will do nothing.
for how long time had the human beings had
The ability to talk.
They discussed it, of course, you cannot answer that question.
Then I said, okay, how... How long have they had their ability to write?
You know, written control.
Then they come to 20,000 years, 2,000 years.
No, we concluded, let's say about 6,000 years.
Or 5, okay, you know?
Like that.
The very oldest stereoglyphs maybe has.
Oh, that's hilarious.
That's right.
And then, for instance, when was the middle age?
And then one boy said, the 18th century?
No, no, I said no.
And now their curiosity was awakened.
Then we could start.
So the questions are important.
And even if there's no challenge in the answer, you know, the fact that the mind is thinking, I think the two questions you pick, who am I?
Just by asking it, it will in a way enlarge our feeling about life.
And then of course if you look at the Bible, in the beginning God made
Or a body?
Maybe, maybe.
You know, even in the Bible, you do have a philosophical part.
For instance, you know, the book called What do you say?
What is the English word?
The book called Job, of course.
You know?
Job.
And the Book of the Preacher, the Preacher.
And also the Book of the Preacher in the Old Testament.
He's saying, everything is empty.
So, you are completely right.
You know, I've heard that people are forced to ask a question in four different ways.
You know,
Asking questions, I have that right here.
I always get the question, what is my favorite philosopher, and then I say that I'm more interested in the question.
Well, I haven't asked you that.
I'm asking Joseph Keller who's your favorite author.
Who do you read?
And also, of course,
the different philosophers they have different projects like the critocratic philosophers they want to examine the nature socrates wants to examine justice platos and aristotle is the forms in nature you know and like that i have a quote from socrates in my book you know remember the use of demons
This saying about, you know, the oracle in Delphi was asked who is the white person, individual, in Athens.
And then it was Socrates.
And he didn't know anything.
But then all the people pretending that they knew, of course they were not so white.
You have a Latin expression.
Docta ignorantia.
The learned not knowing.
Ignorantia.
Ignorance, you know.
The learned ignorance.
Docta ignorantia.
Which is like old people, you know.
They weave this stadium.
You know.
very often 11 12 years old boys they feel they know everything i just want to make sure i have all the questions i think it's kind of cute that sophie's mother kind of suspect something going on here and there is
I think I asked you a question and I must have interrupted you, but did you see yourself when you envisioned not?
Yes, you asked me it better.
You know, of course, in a way, he is taking over the role as a teacher for me.
You know, it was a very beautiful thing for me.
that now I could use another philosopher than myself.
A man that could be a little more ironic, a little rougher.
You say ruff?
Ruffer.
And a little more plain, playful, a little more than me, you know?
Because we like textbooks.
This genre is very narrow.
We have now looked at this, and now we will look at that, you know?
It's very boring.
So here you take over the role as a teacher.
When we use the word genre in fiction, it's to describe like a mystery or a science fiction.
I think.
A specific kind of writing.
What I mean is drama.
Drama.
You're using novel and a much wider set.
Here's him.
In a literary sense, not even literary.
When you say a person writes within a genre,
He writes a mystery.
He writes a detective story.
But what was the effect?
If you have poetry, if you have novels, you have prose and novels, you know?
Okay, I wouldn't use a text.
I wouldn't use a journal.
What would you use?
Style?
You have nonfiction, you have fiction, you have drama, you have poetry, but I wouldn't call those genres.
I just wouldn't even use the word.
The genre does identify a kind of fiction writing.
Okay, I see.
And it's usually used to put down the very formulae, as if Peggy for Christy was a genre writer.
You know, detective novels.
In Norway, we, we, we, we, I know.
Don't call yourself a genre writer.
No, because in Norway, at the school, we don't.
I won't use it by school either, because it's not what you mean, I understand.
You know, in Norway, because he, of course, this book is, you know, this is a fiction.
Right.
But also typical.
Yes, but he, you are right, it is a novel.
Well, it says right here, a novel about the history of philosophy.
That's very good that they did that.
Yes, I think so, because people... I was very glad that I... No, I wrote this.
Oh, really?
Because I called it Sophie's World.
You know, the history of Sophie and the history of philosophy.
And then I wrote it.
I wrote about it, yes.
Thank you.